# AI-Vs-Real-Art-Classification
A CNN based project which attempts to classify the art as AI generated or Real Art.

The dataset comprises of two classes- art images generated by AI image generation models such as DALL-E and Midjourney, and real images known to be made by humans.
The objective of this project is to classify the images as AI or Real art using image classification techniques.

### Models experimented
1. A CNN architecture defined from scratch
2. Hyper-parameter tuning of the CNN architecture to improve the model above
3. A transfer learning approach using VGG16 where we will use it in three different ways
 -  Extract features using the weights of imagenet and then feed to fully connected layers
 -  Train the VGG16 architecture from scratch on our dataset
 -  Freeze some layers of the VGG16 architecture and train the test.


### Summary of Results

| Model | Validation Accuracy|
|---|---|
|Basic CNN | 71%|
|CNN with parameter tuning| 76%|
|VGG16 with imagenet weights| 84%|
|VGG16 fully trained on this data| 91%|
|**VGG16 with transfer learning**|**90%**|

Although VGG16 tha was fully trained on the data gave better validation accuracy, I decided to go with the VGG16 with transfer learning wherein I froze the first 15 layers and made the remaining ones trainable, followed by the fully connected layers.


| Model | Validation Accuracy | Test Accuracy|
|---|---|---|
|VGG16 with transfer learning | 92%|92%|

### Scope for improvement

The model showed some weaknesses identifying the real art from AI art. The precision and recall on AI art were both impressive (>95%). This could be due to the fact that the images generated by stable diffusion are generated from a noise signal, so maybe the model uses this as a key feature for prediction. 

So any presence of noise in the real art may cause the model to be confused. One way to resolve this is to use a de-noising model like auto-encoder prior to sending the images to the model for classification. 


## Dataset Attribution and Citation

The dataset used in this project is sourced from Kaggle:

- **Title**: AI recognition dataset
- **Author**: Nathan Koliha
- **Year**: 2024
- **Data set**: [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets)
- **DOI**: [https://doi.org/10.34740/KAGGLE/DSV/7501727](https://doi.org/10.34740/KAGGLE/DSV/7501727)

Please cite the dataset as:

Nathan Koliha. (2024). AI recognition dataset [Data set]. Kaggle. https://doi.org/10.34740/KAGGLE/DSV/7501727
